---
title: Rope Meditation
date: 2016/11/02
category: festivals
cover: "/public/writings/gifts-of-nature.jpg"

---
Like a vast tapestry of beautiful and colorful _lilas_, the month of Kartik is the sweetest and most charming time in Vraja. Kartik, also known as Damodara, is the king of months and the favorite of Sri Krishna. The name “Kartik” is derived from “Kartiki,” a name which honors Srimati Radharani as the daughter of Kartiki, another name of Kirtida.

The sweetness of this glorious month of Damodar increases due to the influence of His Queen, Kartiki, who was the first to lovingly bind Sri Krishna with her delicate, silken sash which adorns her slender waist. This pastime symbolizes and glorifies the image of the Lord as the original thread which attracts, unites and weaves everything together.

During Kartik we generally practice additional forms of sadhana. Twice a day, devotees gather to light candles and offer them to the Damodar form of Krishna. The offering of candles kindles the flame of our love and the singing of “Damodarastakam” awakens the sweetest flavor of tender affection towards our childlike Lord.

In the diary of his spiritual journey (“Damodarastakam” prayer), Satyavrata Muni begins with effusive praise of the Supreme as the form of _sat-cit-ananda_ and culminates with worship of a rope. Thus, he condenses the glories of Kartik into one final verse which conveys its essence: _“O Lord, the entire universe was created by_ [_Lord Brahma_](http://www.krishna.com/info/brahma)_, who was born from Your abdomen, which was bound with a rope by Mother Yasoda. To this rope I offer my humble obeisances.”_

If we examine Satyavrata Muni’s sentiments of worshiping a rope, we find the prevalence of symbolic ropes and knots present in many cultures. Various cultural rituals also incorporate ropes or threads into their ceremonies. The rope in general, as well as the specifics of how it is cast, knotted, or looped represents subtle or mystical propensities.

Rope symbolizes the desire for and means of ascension, the connection between the spiritual and material worlds. It is the bonding thread that affects the union of the individual soul and Krishna. While worldly ropes bind the _jivas_ in suffering and limitation, the ropes of spiritual love offer both the hope and means of deliverance and freedom. The marriage of bride and groom, as well as that of the connection between the _jiva_ and _Isvara_, is denoted by interweaving two threads into a single string, signifying two individual lives unifying into one spirit.

A rope consists of interwoven threads. Each thread signifies an agent who links all beings in relationship to one another and back again to their original cause. Furthermore, the thread, or _sutra_, links this reflected material world to the spiritual reality it mirrors. A tapestry is created by individual threads rhythmically woven back and forth across a loom. Similarly, the rhythms of life and death, inhalation and exhalation, light and darkness, cause and effect, evolution and involution flow regularly, weaving the intricate pattern of life. The concept of wonderful potencies lurking within the image of a rope finds its origin in the pastimes of Radha and Krishna enacted during Kartik.

In _vatsalya bhava_, the rope is in Mother Yasoda’s hands, binding her son to a mortar. Finding her son to be mischievous and feeling the need to discipline Him, she binds Him with ropes of motherly love. This pastime is immortalized as Damodara Lila. Similarly, the cows of Vrindavan, who also have motherly sentiments toward Krishna, bind Damodara with the very ropes which tie them at the time of milking.

The effects of Kartik’s rope are mutual. As the rope is pulling the devotee toward Krishna, the rope also serves to draw Krishna into the temple of His devotees’ hearts. The Lord is bound by their devotion, and He cannot escape. Thus, the inmates of the network of Krishna’s love make Him captive to their devotion. The same ropes which bind Krishna also serve to deliver others. Krishna feels indebted to devotees who bind Him with their love, and He seeks the means of clearing his debt. Krishna’s quality of letting Himself be bound by a rope, a most astonishing attribute of His, constitutes not a fault but rather an ornament which delights His devotees.

Prominent amongst the bitter-sweet _lilas_ is Srila Prabhupada’s final pastime. Prabhupada, Damodara’s royal servant, wove very strong ropes of attachment which bound his disciples to him in love. These ropes then served to pull the devotees across all obstacles of resistance, reluctance, impersonalism and even the disruption created by death or separation.

Krishna carries His rope in various ways and in different manners, which signify the wide range of effects his rope may possess. When Krishna sets forth with his coil of rope slung loosely over His shoulder, the devotees feel joyful for lost soul He is searching out. They wish him all success in drawing the reclaimed soul back into the intricate network of His pastimes. When draped up high upon His turban, the same rope serves as the banner proclaiming His victory in retrieving the heart of that fortunate soul He was pursuing. Lost souls bind Krishna to them simply by their willingness to open their hearts to Him. This cooperation on their parts casts the thread that unites them with Krishna, who, in turn, will not fail to reciprocate. That same thread grows stronger as the reciprocation flows back and forth and eventually becomes the rope that Krishna uses to lead the fortunate soul back home.

Remaining forever bound by that first tie of affection, Radha and Krsna invite us all to weave the fabric of our individual lives into the transcendental tapestry of Braja. Thus, the tapestry depicting the most splendid and luminous _lilas_ will be expanded and embellished, decorating Vraja, enlivening the devotees and delighting their Lordships in the month of Kartik.